---
layout: post
title:  "Expand your worldview to grow your business"
subtitle: "Why your business needs a stroy more than ever."
date:   2016-09-26 08:00:00
categories: [business]
excerpt: Your business needs a story. In an increasingly busy world the only way to capture people's attention is to tell a story. People buy the story behind the product, and not the product itself. 
tag: blog
---

How expanding our worldview makes great ideas happen
Great ideas are made in the borders between one discipline and another. Engineering is ever more interdisciplinary as a result. Previously, electrical engineering and mechanical engineering could feasibly be two different, very separate things. Nowadays they’re intertwined in every way. The same goes for all disciplines of engineering.

Boundaries have been crossed and innovations have been made as result of thinking between different disciplines, combining, and tearing apart ideas to create innovative solutions. That’s why engineers nowadays need to be comfortable working and collaborating across disciplines and in different practices.

This is true for the bridge between engineering disciplines, but it’s also true when combing engineering disciplines with non engineering disciplines. Justine Musk explains this in more detail with her answer to a Quora post:

> Choose one thing and become a master of it.  Choose a second thing and become a master of that.  When you become a master of two worlds (say, engineering and business), you can bring them together in a way that will a) introduce hot ideas to each other, so they can have idea sex and make idea babies that no one has seen before and b) create a competitive advantage because you can move between worlds, speak both languages, connect the tribes, mash the elements to spark fresh creative insight until you wake up with the epiphany that changes your life.

This idea of becoming an expert in two fields in order to be able to think across boundaries to create solutions - is one of the founding values of what we do at bottom line. Looking at a problem through one lens or one mental model you are comfortable with is rarely sufficient to solve problems. The more lenses and the more mental models we can apply to a problem, the more adept we can be at creating innovative solutions and form better decisions. Exposure to different industries differentiates you, becaus

For us, getting into the mindset of our client's businesses and the way they work is integral to our work. We work as insiders, whilst bringing the fresh perspectives of an outsider. To do this we ensure all of our people have as varied backgrounds as possible and we make sure we are able to talk the language of our clients. Without this appreciation ideas can’t happen, and will remain as ideas, mere theories. 

Beyond bottom line, we as business owners could do worse than to immerse ourselves in other unrelated disciplines and hire those who do the same. Maybe if we’re lucky the process Justine describes will hold true, our ideas will have sex and we’ll be on our way to an epiphany which solves a real problem.

It’s time we stopped focusing purely on exploitation and add the right balance of exploration. Hiring people with different worldviews is just one way in which we can do this. By actively seeking out creative ideas which will merge these worldviews into functional and viable solution to the problems our businesses face every day.

It’s very feasible, and probably likely,  that the next great idea will come not solely from your discipline or area of focus, but from a merge of this with some other unknown discipline.