---
layout: 
title:  "The Power of Purpose in Your Business"
subtitle: "Creativity doesn't come in a flash. It's a long an iterative process."
date:   2016-10-17 08:00:00
categories: [marketing]
excerpt: The power of an iterative creative process. Why one and done rarely works and small iterative creation and improvement is the way forward. 
tag: blog
---

Time for the engineering industry to wake up to the purpose driven economy

STEM uptake is on the rise, but there’s another gaping problem facing the industry -The increasing lack of passion and engagement in workplaces. It’s not often talked about, but there’s very few organisations that can truly say they engage and allow their employees to do remarkable things.

It’s happening before engineers even get to the workplace. Students are getting to their final years of university and discovering that nagging feeling that their objectives are ever increasingly distant from the profit focussed objects of engineering organisations. So much so, that most don’t feel it’s worth it. There’s no leadership which inspires them to take action.

Let’s be clear, most engineering graduates do go into engineering jobs nonetheless, two-thirds according to EngineeeringUK, but how many go in with enthusiasm beyond just looking for a paycheque is debatable. When they arrive, they’re largely going through the motions. They’re progress and endeavours are more down to their personal objectives than any larger purpose beyond making the next grade.

AREN’T ENGINEERS PASSIONATE ABOUT PROBLEM SOLVING?

Yes, that’s why so many go into engineering. Some time down the line however, they’re face with this agonising disconnect: between their passion for solving problems and the robotic behaviour encouraged by most cultures within organisations. Creativity, self expression, and passion - non existent. Going through the motions, day after day. Truth is though, this barrier to true creativity is put in place whilst many study engineering. They’re made aware of every constraint and every limitation and as such they become far too familiar of what is and isn’t possible. But in creativity and innovation, there are no rules - Sir John Hegarty knows and writes about this, albeit in a context other than traditional engineering. There are some organisations that know this also and have adapted to allow for true self expression so that ideas can blossom into solutions, because they know that innovation and progression doesn’t happen when shackles are put in place. Neither do engaged and passionate workplaces for that matter.

WHAT’S THE POINT? WHAT’S THE PURPOSE OF IT ALL?

That’s what companies should be asking themselves. Umar Haquie comments;

“we’re on the cusp of a values driven economy”.
If that’s true, then there’s going to be a huge amount of change in the way we engineer, to avoid mass disengagement in our workplaces. Lets be clear, most companies have a purpose and have values, but they’re rarely clear, and mostly aligned with the interests of it’s shareholders. Wouldn’t the interests of it’s shareholders be better met, if our workplaces become purpose driven and full of engage and passionate individuals who actually want to make a difference?

The best organisation know this. The ones that will outlast and manoeuvre there way through any economic downturn, and any tough period. The oil and gas industry is experiencing a down turn as we speak, and if anything, it should signal to the industry it’s real strengths and weaknesses. It will reveal to them the real interests of its employees - my suspicions suggest they’re not totally bought in by the organisation or by purpose but by a once glamourous industry. The operators and companies that come out strongest will be the ones that have engaged and passionate employees at their core, that are so empowered by the greater purpose that no task is too large and no problem is too complex to overcome. Purposes don’t all need to be noble, there is no right and no wrong, what is expected is that organisation show a willingness to solve society problems and provide customers with tangible benefits in a socially responsible manner. It’s no different to any other business venture.

Whatever ones feelings about the tobacco industry, having Philip Morris in both Good to Great and Built to Lasthas proved very instructive. It has tauht me that it is not the content of a company's values that correlates with performance, but the strength of conviction with which it holds those values, whatever they might be.
Elon Musk is a visionary, and probably the most influential engineer in the world right now. But by far his most impressive ability, is his awareness of what a purpose and a cause can do when trying to create great work. Every single person at Tesla is there because they’re as emotionally invested in the idea as him. The extract below taken from a Quora answer by Victoria Danahy explains here:

I worked full time for Tesla for a year while in school. And got headhunted from an Apple recruiter for a much more lucrative position (better pay, better title, etc.) I declined after long consideration. I have no regrets.

The reason is, people who work for Tesla are immersed with, not the car or the "I work for a sexy company" status, but with the meaning it carries. Tesla's mission statement, "accelerate the transition of sustainable transportation" isn't taken lightly when it comes to the dedicated employees Tesla hires.
So what (I believe) Elon means is, "we hired you because you believe in our mission and are ready to dedicate your time and energy to building a better future with us"—loyalty and commitment is the key underlying message here.
They’re their because they see the purpose and they want to be a part of it. The cynical amongst you might argue that not every engineer, or organisation has a sexy purpose or mission statement to tout and that it’s impossible to make some industrious fit this model. Elon makes batteries sound exciting by solving a real problem and attaching it to a greater purpose.  Purposes can come in many shapes and forms with the only prerequisite being that you are providing a tangible service or product that solves a problem or addresses the needs of society.

TELL A COMPELLING STORY WITH AUTHENTICITY

Absolutely no one can doubt the strength of Elon Musks convictions or his motives. It’s a matter of consistency and story telling. It’s a matter of differentiating what you do and and how you do it. It’s about values. (More on Story telling later, but here’s a glimpse into it). Engineers are really bad story tellers. It’s often cited as a reason why young kids don’t go into STEM subjects, nobody is advertising the industry well enough. There’s not enough exciting and inspiring stories about engineering organisations. It’s also the reason why so few are captivated and engaged by the greater purpose in their organisation.

The solution to this? Companies, now more than ever must consider their purpose and their values to ensure that they tell a compelling story, to their customers, and perhaps more importantly, to their own employees. They’ve got to allow their employees to solve problems and provide solutions, otherwise they will struggle to adapt and progress in the future.
